# tree_sitter_jinja Module

This module contains a tool that processes the most common jinja value templates in dbt model files. The tool uses `tree-sitter-jinja2`  and the python bindings for tree-sitter as dependencies.

# Strategy

The current strategy is for this processor to be 100% certain when it can accurately extract values from a given model file. Anything less than 100% certainty returns an exception so that the model can be rendered with python Jinja instead. 

There are two cases we want to avoid because they would risk correctness to user's projects:
1. Confidently extracting values that would not be extracted by python jinja (false positives)
2. Confidently extracting a set of values that do not include values that python jinja would have extracted. (misses)

If we instead error when we could have confidently extracted values, there is no correctness risk to the user. Only an opportunity to expand the rules to encompass this class of cases as well.

Even though dbt's usage of jinja is not typed, the type checker statically determines whether or not the current implementation can confidently extract values without relying on python jinja rendering, which is when these errors would otherwise surface. This type checker will become more permissive over time as this tool expands to include more dbt and jinja features.

# Architecture

This architecture is optimized for value extraction and for future flexibility. This architecture is expected to change, and is coded in fp-style stages to make those changes easier for the future.

This processor is composed of several stages:
1. parser
2. type checker
3. extractor

The parser generated by tree-sitter in the package `tree-sitter-jinja2`. The python hooks are used to traverse the concrete syntax tree that tree-sitter makes in order to create a typed abstract syntax tree in the type checking stage (in Python, we have chosen to represent this with a nested tuple of strings). The errors in the type checking stage are not raised to the user, and are instead used by developers to debug tests.

The parser is solely responsible for turning text into recognized values, while the type checker does arity checking, and enforces argument list types (e.g. nested function calls like `{{ config(my_ref=ref('table')) }}` will parse but not type check even though it is valid dbt syntax. The tool at this time doesn't have an agreed serialization to communicate refs as config values, but could in the future.)

The extractor uses the typed abstract syntax tree to easily identify all the refs, sources, and configs present and extract them to a dictionary.

## Tests

- Tests are in `test/unit/test_tree_sitter_jinja.py` and run with dbt unit tests

## Future

- This module will eventually be rewritten in Rust for the added type safety